//
//  Research.txt
//  Pharos
//
//  Created by Isabel Cristina Marras Salles on 01/03/26.
//

//www.bbc.com/portuguese/salasocial-47981858
"In other words, this circuit is shaped by the way we read and the time we spend reading. As digital habits currently favor shallow reading, in which we merely skim through various texts, the danger, says Wolf, is that the ability to understand complex arguments — whether they are present in a legal contract, a book, or a longer report — may 'atrophy' if not exercised. We cease to be deeply engaged in what we are reading, which makes it more unlikely that we will be transported to a real understanding of another person's feelings and thoughts."

//jornal.usp.br/radio-usp/literatura-e-essencial-na-compreensao-da-realidade-e-na-projecao-de-novos-futuros/
"In these accelerated times we live in, where we cannot play or sleep as we should, literature functions as a kind of pocket of resistance, which installs a pause, a small pause in this acceleration. Between critique and invention, literature thus affirms itself as a space of resistance, diversity, and the future: a pause in the face of the speed of contemporary life, capable of returning to the reader the capacity to dream, question, and reinvent the world."

//jornal.usp.br/radio-usp/habito-de-leitura-no-brasil-perde-espaco-para-redes-sociais-e-para-o-ritmo-da-vida-moderna/
"According to the report, the lack of time, lack of interest in the habit, and preference for other activities, such as consuming content on social media, are the main factors distancing people from the pages. For the professor, the reduction in the parameters presented is due to the dynamics of current life. 'We are a multifaceted society. Today, we watch television at the same time as we read a text, at the same time as we have our cell phone on next to us, so all of this will, evidently, disperse concentration,' she says. According to her, digital activities are more attractive due to the fast and immediate connectivity, paramount in the so-called dopamine era. Apps and online interactions are designed as a way to stimulate the release of dopamine, the hormone that provides the sensation of pleasure and the constant search for rewards."

//books.google.com.br/books?hl=pt-BR&lr=&id=wXqaDwAAQBAJ...
"For us humans, reading has to be learned. We need an environment that helps us develop and connect a complex assortment of basic and not-so-basic processes."

//www.cnnbrasil.com.br/lifestyle/apenas-20-dos-brasileiros-usam-tempo-livre-para-ler-mostra-pesquisa/#goog_rewarded
"Furthermore, 36% of respondents declared having some difficulty reading, such as not understanding what they read or difficulty concentrating. Another 26% claim to have no patience for reading. Only 38% state they have no difficulty, a lower percentage compared to 48% in 2007. Another point identified by the research was the low valuation of reading, with 46% stating they have no time to read."

//g1.globo.com/pr/parana/especial-publicitario/unicuritiba-guia-de-saude-e-bem-estar/noticia/2026/02/02/como-estimular-a-leitura-na-era-da-informacao-compacta-e-instantanea.ghtml
"In the assessment of psychologist Eliane Mion, continued reading trains skills that are currently stifled by the excess of stimuli. 'Encouraging reading activates various brain regions, stimulating attention, memory, language, and contributes to abstract thinking and problem-solving.' Amidst the avalanche of rapid information, the book offers time for listening, pause, and reflection. Stimulating reading is teaching the brain to slow down, and this is essential for maintaining emotional balance and critical thinking in the digital age."

//www.revistaencontro.com.br/canal/revista/2022/02/especialistas-dao-dicas-de-como-recuperar-o-habito-da-leitura-profunda.html
"This is because concentration and focus are needed to delve into the words and their meanings so that one gains repertoire, vocabulary, develops empathy, and participates in the symbolic game, among other skills and advantages. 'In current times, we live with the great malady of the inability to maintain attention,' says neurologist Galileu Chagas. 'Digital media leads us to change focus with great frequency and speed, and this is extremely deleterious to our brain,' he adds. According to him, following the example of what happens in meditations such as mindfulness, people feel better, calmer, and happier in moments of focus and attention, including during reading. Neuroscientist and researcher Maryanne Wolf says that the speed of information with which we are bombarded all the time generates an anxiety, an immediacy that has made it difficult to sit down and deepen reading. This is why we have talked so much about deep reading. It is largely due to this context of digital immediacy. In other words, deep reading is a concept that stands in opposition to the immediacy and rapid readings we have to do today from this expansion of digital resources, email, WhatsApp. What has been observed is that this type of reading does not allow the development that deep reading allows: being able to stop, enter another context, appropriate the narrative, make inferences, metaphors… We will only achieve the appropriation of an intimate library and increase vocabulary if it is contextualized, and this can only be done in in-depth reading. And the competition is unfair, as the stimuli of the digital world are enormous, not only written, but with movement and sound.Deep reading is nothing more than concentrated reading with sustained attention. In current times, we live with the great malady of the inability to maintain attention. That is why there is this pseudo-pandemic of ADHD which, in many cases, is chronically the absence of stimulus for sustained concentration and, on the other hand, a profound stimulation of uninterrupted distraction. Digital media leads us to change focus with great frequency and speed, and this is extremely deleterious to our brain, which was made to concentrate. One example is some meditations, such as mindfulness, which have shown good scientific evidence of cognitive benefits for anxiety and mood disorders. And mindfulness is nothing more than full attention. Deep reading is this: if I am entirely in the reading, concentrated, without distraction, I will actually see what I am reading, and then I will be transformed by it.First step: it is necessary to realize that reading cannot happen concurrently with other activities. At the time of reading, it is only reading. This awareness and this practice are the most important. Everything takes time; I have to train the brain. But little by little, as I discipline myself to set aside time for reading, avoiding distractions, the brain adapts to it and the activity happens more lightly, less forcefully, and more effectively. For adults, becoming aware of the benefits can help, as can the attempt to create a reading routine. Set aside a time for this, look for a pleasant environment, and remove distractions. If your cell phone is your reading device, leave it in airplane mode. And try to discover what you like to read — it can be comics, self-help, it doesn't matter, as long as you read. Over time, you gain more fluency and the range can expand."

//revista.ioles.com.br/boca/index.php/revista/article/view/1126/633
"According to the research coordinator Zoara Failla, the internet and social media are reasons for the decline in the percentage of readers, especially among the wealthier and highly educated layers. (Jornal Agorarn, 2020). This data is concerning, for how to explain a subject being in an academic space and not liking reading, when they should be the ones who like reading the most. According to the ideas of Batista (2015, p.21), reading is an active process of constant interaction and creation between the reader and the text, thus requiring an active reader."

//www.bbc.com/portuguese/geral-59121175
"According to the program, 'research shows that the amount of time spent reading long texts is decreasing and, due to digitalization, reading is becoming more intermittent and fragmented,' something that could 'have a negative impact on the cognitive and emotional aspects of reading.' 'If we do not train these skills, we may end up losing the ability to understand more complex content and, perhaps, to get involved and use our imagination,' highlights Mangen."

//www.frontiersin.org/journals/psychology/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00578/full
"Efficient reading depends on sustained attention and cognitive control — and methods that strengthen these processes (such as mindfulness) improve reading ability even in cases of attention deficit."
